UNIX learning project
ft_select
Pedago team pedago@42.fr

Summary: This project is meant to make you code a small program using termcaps
which will allow you to pick from a list of choices and return it to your shell.
Version:

Contents
I

Foreword

2

II

Introduction

3

III

Goals

4

IV

General Instructions

5

V

Mandatory part

7

VI

Bonus part

9

VII

Submission and peer correction

10

1

Chapter I
Foreword

2

Chapter II
Introduction
Some programs, such as your shell, aptitude, top, tig, mcabber, dwarf fortress,
zangband or herrie have at least two things in common: Firstly these programs are all
executed in a terminal and secondly they all offer an advanced user interface despite the
fact that they don’t offer the Microsoft Windows and OSX’s windowed graphic interface
that you have come to expect.

3

Chapter III
Goals
Creating a user interface for a program that is executed in a terminal is doable. It requires
that you master the programming work involved as a terminal does not do much in its
“rough” mode. To see for yourself, launch the command cat without any arguments and
press any keys or a combination of keys on your keyboard...
In doing this, as long as you press alphanumeric keys, nothing special happens. However, if you press either the arrows, the esc key or the fn keys, for example, some random
characters will appear... redo the same thing in your shell now. You are used to the left
arrow moving the cursor to the previous column. Why do we observe such differences
between cat and your shell?
Your terminal manages many things for you without you noticing, such as for instance
the display of characters as you type them or the bufferisation of each line.
If, by now, you are asking yourself how you can control your terminal, this project
is made for you. You will learn to configure your terminal via the "struct termios"
structure as well as to use its technical capabilities, the distinguished "termcaps".

4

Chapter IV
General Instructions
• You cannot use any global variables, except for those which have already been
defined for you. An exception will be made when managing the signals, even though
there are other ways to do it.
• A local function to a C file (which therefore isn’t prototyped in the file .h) must be
defined as static in accordance to the Norm.
• You need to pay attention to types and use casts wisely when deemed necessary, in
particular when a void* type is involved. In absolute terms, avoid implicit casts,
no matter which types.
• This project will be corrected by humans only. You’re allowed to organise and name
your files as you see fit, but you must follow the following rules.
• The executable file must be named ft_select.
• Your Makefile must compile the project and must contain the usual rules. It must
recompile and re-link the program only if necessary.
• If you are clever, you will use your library for your ft_select. Submit also your
folder libft including its own Makefile at the root of your repository. Your
Makefile will have to compile the library, and then compile your project.
• Your project must be written in accordance with the Norm. Only norminette is
authoritative.
• You have to handle errors carefully. In no way can your program quit in an unexpected manner (Segmentation fault, bus error, double free, etc).
• Your program cannot have memory leaks.
• You’ll have to submit a file called author containing your username followed by a
’\n’ at the root of your repository.
$>cat -e author
xlogin$

• A project that displays abstract art (strange characters and/or inadequate) is considered non-functioning.
5

UNIX learning project

ft_select

• In case your program is killed while executing, your terminal must naturally operates normally afterwards...
• You are Never allowed to submit a code that you did not write yourself. If any
doubt exist, you will be invited to recode it to defend your good faith.
• The termcap library is mandatory for this project.
• Before you ask, the ncurse library is forbidden for this project. Else there would
be no challenge...
• This project demands a good thought-process. It is absolutely vital that you discuss
it amongst yourselves and that you share your info!
• Within the mandatory part, you are allowed to use only the following libc functions:

◦ isatty, ttyname, ttyslot
◦ ioctl
◦ getenv
◦ tcsetattr, tcgetattr
◦ tgetent, getflag, tgetnum, tgetstr, tgoto, tputs
◦ open, close, write
◦ malloc, free
◦ read, exit
◦ signal
• You can ask your questions on the forum, on slack...

6

Chapter V
Mandatory part
• Write an “ft_select” program that will get a series of arguments. The list of arguments is displayed in your terminal.
• The user can move through the list of arguments using arrows (the list is circular).
• One or more choices can be selected or un-selected with the the space key. With
each selection, the cursor must automatically position itself on the next element.
• When the user validates the selection with the return key, the list of choices will
be sent back to shell. The latter (i.e. list of choices sent back) will be separated by
a space. This will allow you to use your program ft_select inside a shell script (to
create a “set” for example).
• We must be able to write the following commands:
$> set response = `./ft_select choice1 choice2 choice3 choice4`
$> more `./ft_select *.c`
$> rm `./ft_select ~/*` NB: ONLY use this command IF you
are CERTAIN that your ft\_select
works. We deny any responsibility
if your your ft\_select is
faulty...

• You will also need to manage the resizing of the window by the user. The list
must be seen on a few columns if the size of the windows does not have enough
lines to show them all in one column. If the user resizes the window while he is
using it, the ensemble of his choices will have to reposition automatically and the
selected choices will have to remain. The cursor of selection must be repositioned
in a reasonable manner after a resizing.
• If the window is too small to show everything (not enough lines and/or columns),
the program must react reasonably as long as the dimensions of the window aren’t
sufficient. Under no circumstances, can the program quit or crash. As soon as the
window is large enough, the program must function properly again.
• If the user presses esc key, the program musn’t send anything to the shell and it
has to exit properly.

7

UNIX learning project

ft_select

• If the user presses either delete or backspace, the element the cursor is pointing to
must be erased from the list. If there are no more elements in the list, the behavior
must be exactly the same as if the user had pressed esc.
• Choice non selected: normal text.
• Selected choice: inverse video text.
• Cursor’s position: underlined text.
• Selected choice + cursor’s position: inverse video underlined text.
• Whichever way your program ends, the default configuration of your terminal
MUST be restored. This is true even after it received a signal (except for the
signals that we cannot intercept, but this would mean that your program does not
work).
• We must be able to interrupt your program with ctrl+z and restore it with fg
without seeing any changes in its behavior.
• If the program is launched in an empty environment, you need to behave reasonably.

8

Chapter VI
Bonus part
We will look at your bonuses if and only if your mandatory part is EXCELLENT. This
means that your must complete the mandatory part, beginning to end, and your error
management must be flawless, even in cases of twisted or bad usage. If that’s not the
case, your bonuses will be totally IGNORED.
Possible bonuses :

• When the window is too small, the columns move from left to right depending on
the position of the cursor.
• When the program is terminated, what needs to be erased must be, and the prompt
as well as the cursor will appear on the line that follows the program’s call. Run
tig to see what I mean. Don’t forget about the signals!
• A beautiful interface (up to the corrector to decide, not you!)
• If the choices are files names, colorize the list according to the extensions (a bit like
ls -G on OSX).
• Positioning of the cursor when we type a sequence of characters that matches an
element in the list (dynamic search).

9

Chapter VII
Submission and peer correction
Submit your work on your GiT repository as usual. Only the work on your repository
will be graded.
Good luck to all and don’t forget your author file!

10

